docs/services/SERVICES.md, before:

# Services Architecture Documentation

## Core Concepts

### Service Lifecycle

```typescript
enum ServiceStatus {
  PENDING = "pending", // Initial state
  STARTING = "starting", // Service initialization
  RUNNING = "running", // Service operational
  STOPPING = "stopping", // Service shutdown
  STOPPED = "stopped", // Service terminated
  ERROR = "error", // Service error state
}
```

### Base Service Interface

```typescript
interface Service {
  start(): Promise<void>; // Initialize service
  stop(): Promise<void>; // Cleanup service
  getStatus(): ServiceStatus; // Get current state
  getName(): string; // Service identifier
}
```

## Service Manager

### Overview

The Service Manager provides centralized lifecycle management for all services in the application. It handles:

- Service registration and discovery
- Dependency resolution
- State management
- Error handling
- Metadata tracking

### Implementation

```typescript
class ServiceManager {
  private services: Map<string, Service>;
  private metadata: Map<string, ServiceMetadata>;
  private logger: ManagedLoggingService;

  constructor(logger: ManagedLoggingService) {
    this.services = new Map();
    this.metadata = new Map();
    this.logger = logger;
  }
}
```

### Service Metadata

```typescript
interface ServiceMetadata {
  name: string; // Service identifier
  version: string; // Service version
  dependencies: string[]; // Required services
  isActive: boolean; // Current state
  startTime?: number; // Initialization time
  status: ServiceStatus; // Current lifecycle state
}
```

## Creating Services

### Basic Service Template

```typescript
class ManagedService implements Service {
  private status: ServiceStatus = ServiceStatus.PENDING;
  private readonly config: ServiceConfig;

  constructor(config: ServiceConfig) {
    this.config = config;
  }

  getName(): string {
    return this.config.name;
  }

  getStatus(): ServiceStatus {
    return this.status;
  }

  async start(): Promise<void> {
    try {
      this.status = ServiceStatus.STARTING;
      // Service initialization logic
      this.status = ServiceStatus.RUNNING;
    } catch (error) {
      this.status = ServiceStatus.ERROR;
      throw error;
    }
  }

  async stop(): Promise<void> {
    try {
      this.status = ServiceStatus.STOPPING;
      // Service cleanup logic
      this.status = ServiceStatus.STOPPED;
    } catch (error) {
      this.status = ServiceStatus.ERROR;
      throw error;
    }
  }
}
```

### Error Handling

```typescript
class ServiceError extends Error {
  constructor(
    message: string,
    public readonly code: ErrorCode,
    public readonly retryable: boolean,
  ) {
    super(message);
  }
}
```

## Service Patterns

### 1. State Management

- Always use the ServiceStatus enum
- Implement proper state transitions
- Handle edge cases (double start/stop)
- Log state changes

### 2. Error Handling

- Use typed errors
- Implement retry logic where appropriate
- Handle cleanup in error cases
- Maintain service state consistency

### 3. Dependency Management

- Declare service dependencies explicitly
- Handle circular dependencies
- Implement proper shutdown order
- Validate dependency health

### 4. Configuration

- Use typed configuration objects
- Validate configuration on startup
- Support runtime reconfiguration
- Handle defaults properly

## Testing Services

### 1. Unit Testing Template

```typescript
describe("ExampleService", () => {
  let service: ExampleService;

  beforeEach(() => {
    service = new ExampleService({
      name: "test-service",
      version: "1.0.0",
    });
  });

  it("should handle lifecycle correctly", async () => {
    expect(service.getStatus()).toBe(ServiceStatus.PENDING);
    await service.start();
    expect(service.getStatus()).toBe(ServiceStatus.RUNNING);
    await service.stop();
    expect(service.getStatus()).toBe(ServiceStatus.STOPPED);
  });
});
```

### 2. Integration Testing

- Test service dependencies
- Verify state transitions
- Check error propagation
- Validate cleanup

## Best Practices

### 1. Service Implementation

- Keep services focused and single-purpose
- Implement proper cleanup in stop()
- Use dependency injection
- Follow the lifecycle pattern

### 2. Error Handling

- Use custom error types
- Implement proper logging
- Handle all async operations
- Clean up resources on error

### 3. Testing

- Test all lifecycle states
- Mock external dependencies
- Test error conditions
- Verify resource cleanup

### 4. Performance

- Implement proper caching
- Handle resource limits
- Monitor memory usage
- Implement circuit breakers

## Example Services

### 1. Counter Service

```typescript
interface CounterConfig {
  initialValue?: number;
  maxValue?: number;
}

class CounterService implements Service {
  private status: ServiceStatus = ServiceStatus.PENDING;
  private counter: number;
  private readonly maxValue: number;

  constructor(config: CounterConfig = {}) {
    this.counter = config.initialValue ?? 0;
    this.maxValue = config.maxValue ?? 100;
  }

  // Service implementation...
}
```

### 2. Provider Service

```typescript
interface ProviderConfig {
  cacheTimeout: number;
  retryAttempts: number;
}

class ProviderService implements Service {
  private status: ServiceStatus = ServiceStatus.PENDING;
  private cache: Map<string, CachedData>;
  private readonly config: ProviderConfig;

  constructor(config: ProviderConfig) {
    this.config = config;
    this.cache = new Map();
  }

  // Service implementation...
}
```

## Common Pitfalls

### 1. State Management

- Incorrect state transitions
- Missing error states
- Incomplete cleanup
- Race conditions

### 2. Resource Management

- Memory leaks
- Unclosed connections
- Unhandled promises
- Missing timeouts

### 3. Error Handling

- Unhandled exceptions
- Missing cleanup on error
- Incorrect error propagation
- Incomplete error logging

## Service Guidelines

### 1. Naming Conventions

- Use descriptive service names
- Follow consistent naming patterns
- Document name changes
- Use version control

### 2. Documentation

- Document public APIs
- Include configuration options
- Document error conditions
- Provide usage examples

### 3. Testing Requirements

- Unit test coverage > 90%
- Test all lifecycle states
- Test error conditions
- Test resource cleanup

### 4. Performance Guidelines

- Monitor memory usage
- Implement proper caching
- Handle high load
- Use circuit breakers

Commit message:

docs: update services documentation with provider system reference

docs/services/SERVICES.md, after:

# Services Documentation

## Overview

The Solana trading bot is built on a service-oriented architecture where each component is implemented as a managed service. This design provides:

- Consistent lifecycle management
- Standardized error handling
- Unified logging and monitoring
- Clean separation of concerns

## Core Services

### Provider System

The provider system abstracts interactions with different DEX protocols and liquidity sources. For detailed documentation, see [PROVIDERS.md](./PROVIDERS.md).

Key features:

- Protocol abstraction layer
- Unified trading interface
- Price aggregation
- Liquidity analysis

## Core Concepts

### Service Lifecycle

```typescript
enum ServiceStatus {
  PENDING = "pending", // Initial state
  STARTING = "starting", // Service initialization
  RUNNING = "running", // Service operational
  STOPPING = "stopping", // Service shutdown
  STOPPED = "stopped", // Service terminated
  ERROR = "error", // Service error state
}
```

### Base Service Interface

```typescript
interface Service {
  start(): Promise<void>; // Initialize service
  stop(): Promise<void>; // Cleanup service
  getStatus(): ServiceStatus; // Get current state
  getName(): string; // Service identifier
}
```

## Service Manager

### Overview

The Service Manager provides centralized lifecycle management for all services in the application. It handles:

- Service registration and discovery
- Dependency resolution
- State management
- Error handling
- Metadata tracking

### Implementation

```typescript
class ServiceManager {
  private services: Map<string, Service>;
  private metadata: Map<string, ServiceMetadata>;
  private logger: ManagedLoggingService;

  constructor(logger: ManagedLoggingService) {
    this.services = new Map();
    this.metadata = new Map();
    this.logger = logger;
  }
}
```

### Service Metadata

```typescript
interface ServiceMetadata {
  name: string; // Service identifier
  version: string; // Service version
  dependencies: string[]; // Required services
  isActive: boolean; // Current state
  startTime?: number; // Initialization time
  status: ServiceStatus; // Current lifecycle state
}
```

## Creating Services

### Basic Service Template

```typescript
class ManagedService implements Service {
  private status: ServiceStatus = ServiceStatus.PENDING;
  private readonly config: ServiceConfig;

  constructor(config: ServiceConfig) {
    this.config = config;
  }

  getName(): string {
    return this.config.name;
  }

  getStatus(): ServiceStatus {
    return this.status;
  }

  async start(): Promise<void> {
    try {
      this.status = ServiceStatus.STARTING;
      // Service initialization logic
      this.status = ServiceStatus.RUNNING;
    } catch (error) {
      this.status = ServiceStatus.ERROR;
      throw error;
    }
  }

  async stop(): Promise<void> {
    try {
      this.status = ServiceStatus.STOPPING;
      // Service cleanup logic
      this.status = ServiceStatus.STOPPED;
    } catch (error) {
      this.status = ServiceStatus.ERROR;
      throw error;
    }
  }
}
```

### Error Handling

```typescript
class ServiceError extends Error {
  constructor(
    message: string,
    public readonly code: ErrorCode,
    public readonly retryable: boolean,
  ) {
    super(message);
  }
}
```

## Service Patterns

### 1. State Management

- Always use the ServiceStatus enum
- Implement proper state transitions
- Handle edge cases (double start/stop)
- Log state changes

### 2. Error Handling

- Use typed errors
- Implement retry logic where appropriate
- Handle cleanup in error cases
- Maintain service state consistency

### 3. Dependency Management

- Declare service dependencies explicitly
- Handle circular dependencies
- Implement proper shutdown order
- Validate dependency health

### 4. Configuration

- Use typed configuration objects
- Validate configuration on startup
- Support runtime reconfiguration
- Handle defaults properly

## Testing Services

### 1. Unit Testing Template

```typescript
describe("ExampleService", () => {
  let service: ExampleService;

  beforeEach(() => {
    service = new ExampleService({
      name: "test-service",
      version: "1.0.0",
    });
  });

  it("should handle lifecycle correctly", async () => {
    expect(service.getStatus()).toBe(ServiceStatus.PENDING);
    await service.start();
    expect(service.getStatus()).toBe(ServiceStatus.RUNNING);
    await service.stop();
    expect(service.getStatus()).toBe(ServiceStatus.STOPPED);
  });
});
```

### 2. Integration Testing

- Test service dependencies
- Verify state transitions
- Check error propagation
- Validate cleanup

## Best Practices

### 1. Service Implementation

- Keep services focused and single-purpose
- Implement proper cleanup in stop()
- Use dependency injection
- Follow the lifecycle pattern

### 2. Error Handling

- Use custom error types
- Implement proper logging
- Handle all async operations
- Clean up resources on error

### 3. Testing

- Test all lifecycle states
- Mock external dependencies
- Test error conditions
- Verify resource cleanup

### 4. Performance

- Implement proper caching
- Handle resource limits
- Monitor memory usage
- Implement circuit breakers

## Example Services

### 1. Counter Service

```typescript
interface CounterConfig {
  initialValue?: number;
  maxValue?: number;
}

class CounterService implements Service {
  private status: ServiceStatus = ServiceStatus.PENDING;
  private counter: number;
  private readonly maxValue: number;

  constructor(config: CounterConfig = {}) {
    this.counter = config.initialValue ?? 0;
    this.maxValue = config.maxValue ?? 100;
  }

  // Service implementation...
}
```

### 2. Provider Service

```typescript
interface ProviderConfig {
  cacheTimeout: number;
  retryAttempts: number;
}

class ProviderService implements Service {
  private status: ServiceStatus = ServiceStatus.PENDING;
  private cache: Map<string, CachedData>;
  private readonly config: ProviderConfig;

  constructor(config: ProviderConfig) {
    this.config = config;
    this.cache = new Map();
  }

  // Service implementation...
}
```

## Common Pitfalls

### 1. State Management

- Incorrect state transitions
- Missing error states
- Incomplete cleanup
- Race conditions

### 2. Resource Management

- Memory leaks
- Unclosed connections
- Unhandled promises
- Missing timeouts

### 3. Error Handling

- Unhandled exceptions
- Missing cleanup on error
- Incorrect error propagation
- Incomplete error logging

## Service Guidelines

### 1. Naming Conventions

- Use descriptive service names
- Follow consistent naming patterns
- Document name changes
- Use version control

### 2. Documentation

- Document public APIs
- Include configuration options
- Document error conditions
- Provide usage examples

### 3. Testing Requirements

- Unit test coverage > 90%
- Test all lifecycle states
- Test error conditions
- Test resource cleanup

### 4. Performance Guidelines

- Monitor memory usage
- Implement proper caching
- Handle high load
- Use circuit breakers
